Dear Teacher, I would like to ask a
question about raising children in my
family. Yes, the question is from the user named
Tra Xanh Tinh Ha. I would like to read the
question. Hello Teacher, I would like to ask for your guidance on
some family matters.
Firstly, I have two
young children, one 6 years old and one 8 years old. I
hope you can guide them on how to help
them learn and understand Buddhist teachings.
Secondly, I would like to ask
how to help my children focus on their
studies. Recently, when I remind them to go to school, they
avoid it by doing other things like
cooking, tidying up, and finding something else
to do instead of
studying, so they don't remember much of what they've learned, especially my child in
first grade who is learning to read according to the
new curriculum.
Thirdly, I would like guidance on
how to talk to my children when
they often argue and fight,
but sometimes they also
care for each other. When they are apart, they miss each other and cry, but when they are together, they are different.
Fourthly, my child is...  A large birthmark on my child's
face often makes me very worried that when they
grow up, it will negatively impact their self-esteem, inferiority complex, and lead to them being withdrawn and isolated
from malicious comments
from friends and people around them. I've even
had to defend my child when people
ask about it, and I'm very worried that they will think a
lot about this later. What should I do in
that situation? Is there any way in Buddhism to
resolve or cure this birthmark? I
respectfully
ask for your help, Madam. Regarding the first point of the question, which is about wanting my child to be
happy and learn the Dharma later on,
let's look at a real-life example.
I remember the master giving a lecture on a sutra. It's
about the mother of Mencius.
When he was a child, their house was
near a cemetery, and every day she
passed by there for funerals. Gradually,
she came home and saw her son learning to play the zither and other instruments. She was
so scared that
she moved to
another place, which happened to be near a market.  At the
market, the mother saw her child learning
how to slaughter animals. That means at the market, there's
often killing. So, the child learned how to
slaughter animals and brought them out to be
butchered. The mother was so scared that she
moved their house closer to the teacher's house. Being
near the teacher's house, the
child started to
observe the students going to
school and learned from them. Later, the child became eager to learn
and very intelligent. In
Buddhism, this phenomenon is explained
as "increasing the karmic conditions," meaning
increasing the karmic connection. But
remember, it's about increasing the karmic conditions,
not forcing them. Sometimes, forcing things can lead to
failure. Forcing things can lead to failure.
That means children at this young age
have to balance many things:
first, studying; second, playing; and
third, learning about Buddhism.
Children don't understand much yet, so they
come to Buddhism to play, and from playing
to learning. We must know how to do it this way.
Many people want their children to learn
about Buddhism and force them to do it every day.  It's also good to chant
scriptures every day. If you force them to chant, they'll get scared and hate
Buddhism. Remember,
people only become passionate about what they like.
So, when your child is young,
take them to the temple to play. That's all. They'll make friends
there, they'll
connect with the people, they'll
feel it, and it will gradually sink into their heart. They'll learn to be
good and kind, and those who love them will
love
Buddhism. Then, you can guide
them gradually. They'll chant "Namo Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva"
for good luck. They'll
ask for Buddha's blessings. That's what
people call gradually increasing positive karma.
Don't force things. Many people are very
unreasonable; forcing them to chant is like forcing them to do something
they don't
understand. If they don't understand, they'll hate it. They need to be passionate about it to
like it, or have a purpose, right?
But children
don't understand the purpose yet, so
we have to make them feel
comfortable.  If you're going to have your
child read a Buddhist scripture, just let them read
three or four lines at a time. Just a little bit, like, "Read this, so that
you can ask Buddha to make you
intelligent." Just three or four
lines, that's enough. That
's how you introduce your child
to Buddhism. Then, we'll
do some spiritual things,
dedicating the merit to the children
so they'll connect with
Buddhism. When they grow up,
we'll take them to the temple and let them
do their assigned chores. "Little one, little one,
here, sweep here."
But when they're sweeping, tell them, "Sweep as much as you can."
When they can't
sweep anymore, put the broom away. "
Go play, remember. Don't make me
sweep this whole place for you." Don't scold them or
force them to do it, or
threaten them with karmic retribution, saying, "Next time, they won't go to the
temple."
This is a very
gentle and slow approach, because children
are eager to play, so you have to use that play
to guide them towards Buddhist practice.
Okay?  That's the gradual approach. And
your next point is how to help
your child focus and study.
Well, we need to see if the child's studies
are too stressful. If it's too stressful, they
won't be able to concentrate.
Because, as the saying goes, "When you're
studying, you know what you're passionate about, and
you like what you're passionate about."
So, if your child's learning ability is low, and
you force them to learn at a high level, they
won't be able to handle it and will get bored.
Many parents nowadays fall into this trap.
What is this trap? They look for really good teachers,
they see other
children doing well, and they think
their child will do the same. They
push even harder, and that only leads to poor academic performance,
not good learning.
Many children, due to
this kind of pressure,
have dropped out of university because of stress.
Therefore,
we need to balance studying and playing for our children at
a level that allows them to thrive.
The children's ability to absorb information is important, and we must
check and complete the process ourselves. Sometimes, we
shouldn't just listen to the teacher. At this point,
the Mind-Controlling Meditation isn't saying the
teacher is wrong; it's not that the teacher is wrong. It's that
when the teacher sees that
your child is learning and you force them to learn, they might say, "They can learn even
more, they can learn even more." Therefore,
even after listening to the teacher, you still have to
check and don't leave everything to the teacher. Only by learning alongside your
child can you truly understand
their learning capacity and determine what to teach them next.
Previously, the Mind-Controlling Meditation
also sent children to
Mind-Controlling Meditation classes, but it wasn't like that.
Never did it. I told
my children to learn according to their interests and
what they felt comfortable with. The
results for both children weren't
bad, not bad at all. But forcing them
too much can sometimes make them uncomfortable. If they hate
learning, then you become a failure.
Of course, if they hate it, they'll tell you.  If
they lie, they get angry, and if I get angry at them, and
they get angry at me, then
our relationship will be strained, and
they won't listen to what I say anymore, right?
Therefore, it's important that we
accompany our children in their studies. We study
math with them, sometimes with them, and
review other subjects together to see how
they're doing. We need to see if we can
continue sending them to a teacher who can help them learn according to
their abilities and needs. That's how we help
our children absorb the material. If we just
force them to study, and then do
our own work, and then
keep asking them if they've finished their homework,
and then ask how many points they got today,
why they need extra
lessons, and so on, we'll
fail. So, teaching children
requires thinking from your own perspective, just like
before, the concept of mindfulness and mindfulness in learning
also requires thinking from your own perspective. For example, if
you feel you love something,
then you study that, and you
need a companion to learn with.  When my child was
learning, my older brother and sister taught
him. My
sister taught him, and then I
went to ask the
neighbors what they were good at and asked them to tutor
him.
When you have that kind of companionship, it's
not the teacher. If it were a teacher,
I'd feel a little overwhelmed,
but with my brother and the
people I asked, I wouldn't feel
overwhelmed. So you have to
become a companion to your child.
Don't force yourself to go to school;
you have to
go to school too. Don't leave it all to the teacher, or you
'll lose your child.
You should only accept things that you don't understand at your own level.
When your child is young, you
learn gradually, and then you
learn together. When you have
a friend to help your child, you know
their abilities and you can
help them better. Regarding
this question, my answer is that
you should be a companion to your child.
Your child is either your husband or your wife; don't leave everything
to the teacher. The third point is what parents
should do when children argue and
fight. We have two children, so how we
handle them is extremely
important. The way we interact between the two children is
crucial. If we favor one child, it
will create
conflict between the two. If
we make them love each other,
we will never create
conflict. For example, in the case of the Mind-Viewing and Mind-Viewing, there
are two children with a very large age difference.
We should
support the first child to share
responsibility with the younger one. That means we make them both
belong to their proper place,
not treat them as
equals. What does it mean to be
equal? ​​Usually, we say, "The younger one is small, so you
have to give way to them."
That word "give way" is extremely
dangerous. They think they have to give way to their younger sibling and
always demand more, right?
That's very difficult. So we should shift
to the word "responsibility."  It's better, of
course, I'm not going to use the
word "responsibility" directly. I'll be more subtle. Back then, when the
child was little, they'd ask for four
things at once. That's right, four things at once!
For example, if you see them
about to ask for something else, like, "Mom, you know how to raise a child," or "They're about to give birth to
something else,"
then naturally the older sibling would become the
one watching over the younger one, serving them, and
understanding them. Do you understand this
way of raising children? The teacher, Tâm Chiếu Hoàn,
had two children,
and when the older child grew up, he'd
say, "You
can replace your mother as your sister's mother." Because you're
older now, you can replace your mother as your sister's mother.
Therefore, you'll care for your sister
more than your mother cares for her. That way,
they won't be rivals. They
won't become equals,
meaning if they didn't, the two
siblings would become equals,
overshadowing each other in this way and
that way, and the older sibling wouldn't be a role model
for the younger one. So, the older sibling
always has a sense of responsibility.  If you take responsibility for your sibling,
they will naturally take responsibility
for you. So, if the two siblings are
responsible for each other, they won't be
jealous, envious, argue, or fight. So,
here, your younger sibling has a great advantage
because you have both a younger and an older child.
You can use the
older sibling as a
partner to help take care of the younger one. Mom asks, "
What is your sibling about to do? Watch
carefully!" That means you should make
someone your partner. The older sibling is
about to ask for this, and the younger sibling asks for this. Then the older
sibling says, "Okay, that's what they asked for," and they
stop arguing over that
item. That's a way of raising children. I
find this method very effective, and
I also find it very effective
in that regard. So, I think
this is a very
good way to raise children, and the two siblings won't
argue much anymore. We shouldn't just
buy things for the older sibling.  Buying a pair of sandals for the younger sibling, and
so on, naturally
creates the mindset
that the two siblings must always have
something equal, something that is equal.
Therefore, we
create jealousy between our two children. We create
this jealousy, and we're not even talking about the future,
but right now, through mindful
observation, we see that the
result is very good. For example, the older sibling has
the responsibility to take care of the younger sibling, and the younger sibling also has the responsibility to take care of the older sibling.
That's just for now. We do
n't know what tomorrow will bring. Of
course, they also have
their own karma, so there will be
changes. But currently,
our way of raising them is about sowing seeds and reaping
fruits. We sow the seeds so they know that the older sibling will be
responsible, and the younger sibling will have a duty to be the younger sibling.
And the older sibling has the responsibility to be the older sibling.
For example, with the younger sibling,
we have to guide them, okay? That's what matters.
Perhaps this is yours, but you
've given it to your child, okay? Then,
next time, we'll say, "Child, give
this to me, give it to me."
Then, naturally, the child will feel like giving,
right? So, next time,
the quality of giving will develop, and the other
will form the quality of caring.
One side gives, the other cares, and
naturally, they will harmonize and get
along. But the mother and
father must cultivate the karmic harmony within the
Golden Club to
transform their words and actions. Only then
will their child accept and listen.
If we don't have the karmic harmony, if we
have the karmic discord, then naturally
our children will argue. So,
we must cultivate it from within,
transforming our own karma, before we
can speak to others. If we have the karmic harmony,
we will think of
ways to achieve harmony, and our child will listen to the
harmonious things we say.
Your next point is, how can your
child... You have a very large birthmark
on your face, how can you not...  Self-consciousness can arise
later, and how can we cultivate a way to
transform this? Dear
friends,
if we have a birthmark, it's
truly impossible not to feel
self-conscious. Even if it's just a tiny mark on the hand, we can't help but feel
self-conscious. Because
when we hold out our hand, the birthmark is there, and that's why we feel
self-conscious. So now,
we can cultivate a way to transform it to
some extent. For example, if a
child is having cosmetic surgery, and they are very young, we should let them have the surgery.
Secondly, we must cultivate ourselves. Then, we
will make a vow to gradually
cultivate ourselves, to teach them to love, to teach
them to share, and
occasionally to do
good deeds to dedicate to the
success of the surgery and to prevent the birthmark
from recurring. So that the
surgery is done only once, and
doesn't recur,
then this will be good.
Yes, I sincerely thank you for your
kind words.  She shared her thoughts on the four questions that
Tinh Ha Green Tea sent to the program.